# frog

> Note: This has been tested on Mac OS/X; I'm using it for
> [my blog][].  It should work fine on Linux.  CAVEAT: It has _not_
> yet been tested on Windows--it's likey that the path handling
> isn't exactly right.

## Overview

Frog is a static web site generator written in [Racket][].

You write content in [Markdown][]. You generate files. To deploy, you
push them to a GitHub Pages repo, or copy them to Amazon S3, or
whatever.

Posts get a variety of automatic blog features.

You can also create non-post pages.

The generated site presumes you're using [Bootstrap][] for CSS.

Yes, it's very much like Octopress and countless others. But it
doesn't require any Ruby gemmage. The only non-Racket part is
optionally using [Pygments][] to do syntax highlighting.

Frog? Frozen blog.

## Layout

The layout is basically this:

```sh
project/
  # These are files you edit:
  .frogrc
  _src/
    footer.md
    About.md
    ...
    posts/
      2013-01-01-a-blog-post-title.md
      2013-02-15-another-blog-post-title.md
      ...
  css/
    bootstrap.css
    bootstrap.min.css
    bootstrap-responsive.css
    bootstrap-responsive.min.css
    pygments.css # control syntax highlighting
  js/
    bootstrap.js
    bootstrap.min.js
  img/
    navbar-logo.jpg
  favicon.ico
  # These are files that are generated by Frog:
  index.html
  About.html
  sitemap.txt
  tags/
  feeds/
  2013/01/a-blog-post-title.md
  2013/02/another-blog-post-title.md
  ...
```

## Posts

You create new posts in `_src/posts`. They should be named
`YYYY-MM-DD-TITLE.md` and need to have some meta-data in the first few
lines.

You can do `racket frog.rkt -n "My Title"` to create such a file
easily. This will also fill in the required meta-data section. The
markdown file starts with a code block (indented 4 spaces) that must
contain these three lines:

```markdown
    Title: A blog post
    Date: 2012-01-01T00:00:00
    Tags: foo, bar, tag with spaces, baz

Everything from here to the end is your post's contents.

If you put `<--! more -->` on a line, that is the "above-the-fold"
marker. Contents above the line are the "summary" for index pages and
Atom feeds.

<!-- more -->

Contents below `<!-- more -->` are omitted from index pages and Atom
feeds. A "Continue reading..." link is provided instead.

```

`Title` can be anything.

`Date` must be an ISO-8601 datetime string: `yyyy-mm-ddThr:mn:sc`.

`Tags` are optional (although you have to include the `Tags:` part).

### Automatic post features

Posts are automatically included in index pages and feeds.

`/index.html` is an index for all posts, listed newest first.

`/feeds/all.xml` is an Atom feed for all posts.

For each tag, there is a `tags/<tag-name>.html` index page (also
listed newest first) and a `/feeds/<tag-name>.xml` Atom feed.

If you post has any section headings (e.g. `# Heading Level 1`, `##
Heading level 2`), then an "On this page" table-of-contents is
automatically generated and placed in the left side bar.

Twitter and Google+ buttons are placed on each post page.

Optional: If your `.frogrc` has a Disqus shortname, then Disqus
comments are automatically included.

Optional: If your `.frogrc` has Google Analytics account information,
then the appropriate tracking code is automatically inserted.

### The `DRAFT` tag

The tag `DRAFT` (all uppercase) causes the post _not_ to be generated.

This way, you can commit the source `.md` file to your repo, and push,
but there will be no corresponding `.html` generated and pushed.  (The
use case here is GitHub pages. If you deploy to something like Amazon
S3, the similar point is that no `.html` file will be generated and
deployed to that.)  _I should rewrite this to be more clear about
different usage scenarios_.

## Non-post pages

You can put other `.md` files in `_src`, and in any subdirs of
it. They will be converted to HTML as non-post pages.  For example,
`_src/About.md` will be `/About.html` in the site.

Non-post pages are _not_ included in any automatically generated index
pages or feeds.  If you want them to be linked in, you must do so
manually.

> Note: The navbar is currently hardcoded to look for `/About.html`, and
> that's it. It's a to-do item to let you specify more items, perhaps
> using a `_src/navbar.md` file.


## footer.md

The special file `_src/footer.md` is converted to HTML and placed at
the foot of all pages (both posts and non-post pages).


## sitemap.txt

A `/sitemap.txt` file (for web crawlers) is automatically generated
and includes all post and non-post pages. (It does _not_ include index
pages for tags.)

## Sharing buttons

Sharing buttons for Twitter and Google+ are automatically put at the
bottom of posts and non-post pages.

## Code blocks

Frog optionally uses [Pygments][] to do syntax
highlighting. In your markdown using backtick code blocks you can
specify a language:

    ```language
    some lines
    of code
    ```

That _language_ is given to Pygments as the lexer to use.

For example this:

    ```js
    /**
     * Some JavaScript
     */
    function foo()
    {
        if (counter <= 10)
            return;
        // it works!
    ```

Yields this:

```js
/**
 * Some JavaScript
 */
function foo()
{
    if (counter <= 10)
        return;
    // it works!
```

And this:

    ```racket
    #lang racket
    ;; Finds Racket sources in all subdirs
    (for ([path (in-directory)])
      (when (regexp-match? #rx"[.]rkt$" path)
        (printf "source file: ~a\n" path)))
    ```

Yields this:

```racket
#lang racket
;; Finds Racket sources in all subdirs
(for ([path (in-directory)])
  (when (regexp-match? #rx"[.]rkt$" path)
    (printf "source file: ~a\n" path)))
```

The appearance is controlled by your `css/pygments.css` file:
[examples](https://github.com/richleland/pygments-css).

I have a soft spot for [Pygments][] because it's actually the first
existing open source project to which I contributed. I added a lexer
for the [Racket][] language. More importantly it has lexers for tons
of languages and is used by things like GitHub (via [pygments.rb][]),
BitBucket, and so on. Plus, it fits the spirit of static web site
generation better than JavaScript options like [SyntaxHighlighter][].

## Dependencies and installations

This depends on two other Racket projects:

1. [#lang rackjure](https://github.com/greghendershott/rackjure)

2. [Racket Markdown parser](https://github.com/greghendershott/markdown)

Neither of these are Planet packages yet. As a result, you'll need to
`git clone` each one, and run `raco link` on each one.

## Per-project configuration: .frogrc

You need to place a `.frogrc` file in your project directory.

The contents:

```sh
# Required: Should NOT end in trailing slash.
scheme/host = http://www.example.com

title = My Awesome Blog
author = The Unknown Author

# Optional: The UA-xxxx account number
# google-analytics-account = UA-xxxxxxx

# Optional: The domain to use. Often just example.com not
# www.example.com
# google-analytics-domain = example.com

# Optional: Disqus comment system "short name"
# disqus-shortname = MyShortName

# Optional: Path to Pygments executable
# pygments-pathname = ~/src/pygments-main/pygmentize
```

## Command line

Run `racket /path/to/frog.rkt -h` to see the options.

```
frog.rkt [ <option> ... ]
 where <option> is one of
  -c, --clean : Delete generated files.
  -m, --make, -b, --build : Generate files.
  -p, --preview : Run a local server and start your browser.
  -n <title>, --new <title> : Create a file for a new post based on today's
    date and your supplied <title>.
  --pygments-css <style-name> : Generate ./css/pygments.css using style-name (ex: 'default')
  --help, -h : Show this help
```

A typical workflow:

1. Create a new post with `racket frog.rkt -n "My Post Title"`. The
name of the new file is displayed to stdout.

2. Edit the file in your preferred plain text editor.

3. Regenerate your site and preview it  with `racket frog.rkt
-bp`.

If you're using [GitHub Pages][], you can commit and push to deploy to
your real site.

## Tips

- If you use Emacs, try markdown-mode. Markdown is _really_ simple,
  but markdown-mode makes it even more enjoyable.

## To-Do

Some things on the "roadmap" (provided anyone wants them):

- Paginate the index pages (show only N posts at a time, with
  older/newer links).
  
- Get the Bootstrap responsive mode working, then add this as a
  `.frogrc` item instead of hardcoding to off. (It was working for my
  previous hand-coded site, but for some reason it's not working for
  Frog.)
  
- Let the user supply a navbar.md to populate the top nav
  bar. Probably as a Markdown unordered (bullet) list of links.


[my blog]: http://www.greghendershott.com
[Racket]: http://www.racket-lang.org
[Markdown]: http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/syntax
[Bootstrap]: http://twitter.github.com/bootstrap/index.html
[Pygments]: http://pygments.org/
[pygments.rb]: https://github.com/tmm1/pygments.rb
[SyntaxHighlighter]: http://alexgorbatchev.com/SyntaxHighlighter/
[GitHub Pages]: https://help.github.com/articles/user-organization-and-project-pages
